\input texinfo                   @c -*- mode: texinfo; coding: utf-8; -*-
@documentencoding UTF-8
@setfilename gpgme-json.info
@include defs.inc

@manpage gpgme-json.1
@ifset manverb
.B gpgme-json
\- Native messaging based GPGME operations
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  gpgme-json
.RB [ \-\-interactive | \-i ]
.RB [ \-\-single | \-s ]
.RB [ \-\-identify
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-lib\-version ]
.RB [ \-\-help | \-h ]
@end ifset

@mansect description
@command{gpgme-json} is a JSON to GPGME bridge.
This interface allows web-browser extensions to communicate with the
GPGME library through the Native Messaging facility from web-browser.


@mansect options
@command{gpgme-json} accepts the following options on the command line:

@item -i
@itemx --interactive
@opindex interactive
Enable interactive mode.  Interactive mode also provides some online help.

@item -s
@itemx --single
@opindex single
Enable single request mode.

@item --identify @var{file|-}
@opindex identify
Identify the type of the data found in @file{file} or standard input @var{-}.

@item --debug
@opindex single
Enable debug mode. Logs are saved to to @file{~/.gnupg/S.gpgme-json.log}.

Note that you can also turn debug mode on and specify a custom logfile using
the environment variable @code{GPGME_JSON_DEBUG}.

@item --lib-version
@opindex version
Print GPGME library version.

@item -h
@itemx --help
@opindex help
Print a usage message summarizing the most useful command-line options.

@mansect bugs
Please report bugs to <https://bugs.gnupg.org>.

@mansect copyright
@command{gpgme-json} is Copyright 2018-2024 g10 Code GmbH.
LGPL version 2.1 or later <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>

This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
